Battlegrounds were not an unordinary sight between the Ancient Persian Empire and the Byzantine Empire
in the Shahnama in the 17th century. The battle between the armies of Shapur and
Rum was not an exception. The almighty Ancient Persian King Shah Ardshir passed and left
the throne to his promising son, Shah Shapur, who acted quickly in place of his
father to engage in the battle in Palawina with the Romans. Shapur sent off his
most powerful fighter, Garshap the Lion, to fight against the Roman’s prized fighter sent by
Caesar, named Bazanush. The fight between the two strong, eager hosts was brutal and never-ending,
as both were equal in strength. In an epic battle, as we see a soldier
beheaded, “ … heaven shook; the earth rocked, and the air Was full of dust, the war-spears
gleamed like fire, And all the men of wisdom called on God.” Shapur could not
take it anymore, and stepped in to gang up on Bazanush and took him captive.
Ten thousand Romans were killed and sixteen hundred more were taken prisoner. The Ancient Persians
and Shah Shapur won the battle, raising their flag high, having defeated Caesar and the Roman
Empire. As a last resort to save him and his Empire’s grace, Caesar sent an
envoy to Shapur. He asks Shapur how many people he will murder in the name
of wealth and fame, and what it would require to stop him from continuing battle
on his grounds, in an attempt to seek remorse from the new king. Shapur, proud
of his battle winnings, left the battle in Palawina only after Caesar sent him ten
ox-hides of dinars, a thousand female and male Roman slaves, and countless pieces of beautiful
brocade to use for dress. With his new riches, Shapur journeyed to the Ahwaz village
where he built his city, naming it ‘Shapur Gird’. On the day of Ard, which
is ironically the Zoroastrian day of making amends to someone for loss, Shapur finished the
city and filled its inhabitants with the slaves Caesar sent. The beautiful city Shapur built
was within the district of Khuzistan, the old citadel, on the great highway where all
can be seen and everything passes. But Shapur did not stop at building one city.
He built himself his own city, which was said to be fair and wealthy, without
the burden of forced labour. A body of water split Shapur’s city though, and he
was in need of a bridge to be able to cross over it. Never ridding
of Bazanush, Shapur made a deal with the prisoner, who Shapur took great care of.
In return for eternal safety and companionship from Shapur and anything desired in his wealthy
treasury, Bazanush was to build a bridge over the body of water and employ the
new inhabitants of Shapur’s city in the engineering project. Bazanush took this offer, and got
to work. After three long years, Bazanush and those he employed finished the great bridge.
As Shapur promised, Bazanush received whatever he wished for, which was to
go home to his family and continue his life. Shah Shapur remained
strong and just in his counsel and his throne remained unmoved for years to come.